  tags:: blog, technical
#[[Blog Posts]]  
  
- # My Journey to FOSS.
- ## Entering FOSS World
  My encounter with FOSS was fairly early then most people would even think about it. When I was 10-14 years old, the corona pandemic broke, that heavily increased my interaction with computers. The credits for initial intro to this amazing world goes to Windows. During that time, my laptop begin to hang and jerk a lot for no know reason, since the lockdown was all over the world, we couldn't get it to the customer care service for sucking money. It was then my father decided to change the Operating System to Linux as he used to use it as his daily driver for academic work and teaching. Hence, came the OS and all the joys with it.  
  The distro was Ubuntu as it was the best viable option for someone who is just starting to use an OS other than windows. I always loved working with computers and playing around with them, customising them on what I like, yet the change opened so many new customization prperties for me which I couldn't have thought of when I was using windows, you could literally change anything you wanted. Soon, I tweaked it with few settings and later install `d-conf editor` and `gnome-tweaks`, they are the first go too tools for any user. I liked the simplicity of Gnome, and searching about it and its related topics made me surf through web pages and wikis for days and weeks.   
  Who said that learning from a structured course is the best way to learn, I literally pumped large amounts of information into me through the internet only with its content available to anyone that I can say I had managed to have a pretty sound understanding of topics, I began to understand and differentiate between various term like `window managers`, `compostitors`, `desktop environments`, `systemd`, `kernel` and so on so forth, the difference between the initial terms established what I called a solid understanding of what these topics are, what are the differences and how do they work together to make a workstation. It was only at this time that I begin to understand that linux is the kernel, and not the OS, though it is indeed the soul of these systems. There comes a lot of things which come above it which makes it workable, It was then I got to know that saying it GNU/linux would be much better choice.(I also learned about what GNU is, its history and how it combined with linux to make the present state of desktops distros). Still for the sake of simplicity I will refer to the OS as linux only.  
- ## Exploring the Gem Mine
  It was never that all these learnings and my developments towards this stream came in a day, I must say that I devoted time in it, sometimes legal, but also sometimes illegal exploration, hiding the contents from my parents when I was looking through these wikis and surfing on the web. It was fun, Even then, I was sure that even though it is not related to the conventional academics of school but yet I am not doing a crime,I am just learning something which interests me.  So, through linux I entered the world of FOSS. Later reading Mozilla's blogs posts and then using firefox for browsing made me understand how this system is transparent, open to all. I begin to value my privacy and thus developed an instinct to search for FOSS alternatives for almost everything I am thinking to use or I am using and hence came the appreciation. The options were not always top notch compared to their proprietary counterparts, but they very well served the purpose they were made for. Soon Firefox replaced Chrome, DuckDuckgo replaced google search, Obsidian replaced notion and so on. I shouldn't say that I didn't use company tools as I used propitiatory services too.(mostly because of its stability and structured support). I still use them, but I always try to keep a note that I am giving data, lots of it, to them without knowing.  
  Now, when I see a developer or computer science student using windows, I am like "Why on earth are you bearing that pain?"  
- ## Some Further Progression
  Not to forget that during same time , in the span of 2-3 years when all this progression happened, I also began to learn python since I had plenty of time for myself. Online classes were a joke in themselves, so I used to attend them but the feeling of going to school having fun and learning in physical world is way more better than watching the screen. Soon, after the building blocks of language were set up, my father introduced me to the free courses offered by an edtech named Jovian. It would be right to mention at this point that my father did a great job in seeding mee with the proper information and reaources whenever needed with detailed plan of action offen described to me by my elder brother. I still fear that they might not have known that they are giving a child his favourite toy or a warrier his lost weapon.  
  So, I moved to understanding libraries and how they integrate with the programming language. Soon, I completed their 3 course which brought mee too models more sophisticated than linear regression and complex in their functioning. I ended my study with lightgbm models. Though I must say that I developed a descent/ below average but workable knowledge about working with databases clean processing data, building and optimizing models. I confess that I never tried my hand during these early days in further moving myself into deep learning models. It was due to my lack of ability to understand basic mathematics like matrices and statistics which were still heavy words for me, yet I approached the company for their bootcamp in Data Science with request of enrollment with scholarship. Seeing my age, and my previous projects which I had made, they decided to accept me to join the bootcamp with less fees. I was truely thankful for kindling my curiosity with much eagerness.  
  I still remember that adding few lines in `.bashrc` file to show the environment name in prompt literally put me on moon, it was like magic for me. I had the pleasure of having few chats and conversation with the co-founders of the startup, which left me bewildered of the humbleness and knowledge they possessed. Since, the course was for undergraduates who wanted to launch themselves in data science, I did a pretty decent job in maintaining myself in the list of early assignment submitters. Though, I didn't completed their course on making resume, cold emails and all that other ways to approach companies, the team was so satisfied by the performance in technical projects that they offered me 3 month internship at their startup as teaching assistant, with a stipend too. It was a big thing for mee, it still is, I accepted the internship without the stipend as where would I ahve used money? After that, came the big blow, when I was about too exit my long relationship with the company, I was approached by them, much to my surprise. They had offered mee a  free enrollment in their paid even bigger bootcamp on full stack development.Sadly, the academics turned their heads from me, hence forced and sad, I polietly rejcted the offera and began my preperation for getting admission in institutes.  
- ## Contributing myself
  So, as the knowledge of language increased I begin to wonder how these FOSS projects are powered and what powers them to remain relevant without drawing money from the end users. That is when I actually understood that the git which I learned as part of the bootcamp actually comes into actions and the whole projects revolve around making new releases after fixing issues and bringing new features. It was only then I was introduced to terms like `bug report` and `PRs(pull requests)` and `MRs(merge requests)` and thus came the entry point which I marked my title for.  
- ## It was not so good of an entrance
  I must acknowledge the fact that the entry was not at all that straight forward as it was using the FOSS resources, it has many bumps which you will manage to steer along if you have the strong will to contribute, during my expedition of looking through various places, documentation is the first major area I found out in most projects, that is nice but if you are from an entirely non-technical background, translation is another big area, if you are from a remote country, it might have more scope, who knows! Even after know python I did my first contribution as a translator to a gnome extension. The fact that most foss projects depend upon a very small group of people(sometimes a single individual) as moderator, the feel of how you are treated in the community of that project entirely depend on the person's nature and belief. I may be wrong, but most of the projects I peeped into had developers of extreme skills but ignorant nature (Edit: A year later I wrote [[DOWNSIDES and perks of being an FOSS project developer]]). It is understandable too as they are not there for your queries which might or I should say will be completely dumb for them. I am foss CLI tool maintainer too, so maintainer should not think I am against anyone. That is why for first timers I give the following suggestion  
  
  > It's okay to be novice  
  
  There is no big deal! everyone was a new comer . Problem lies when we ask questions without proper research. Thus, I suggest the following to the novices:-  
	1. Before asking something on any forum even if related to contribution to projects, first surf any website which can provide you with related information.
	2. Most of the times almost all the new comer issues were somewhere asked by someone in forums, wikis or on any other platform, but is you couldn't find a solution don't hesitate to ask the question!
	3. But in your draft, do mention probable links and places which provided you some direction but not something exactly you were looking for. This simply satisfies the person willing to answer that you have put in enough effort before asking the question.  
I learned this very simple step harshly after my initial questions were marked as duplicated or irrelevent on stackoverflow, putting the reputation on the platform in negative so to say. But as I begin to show my research the responses changed slightly from something like this:-
	  > Again an exit vim question, marking  as duplicate, you could easily find the solutions on web.  
(Ouch! that was rude :) )to something like this:-
	  > This is an duplicate issue and the problem will be solved in upcoming upstream stable release.  
even though the end result of both questions were marked as duplicate, the later one was less humiliating and I must warn that duplicate issues are an issue but they will likely to happen more offen with you, as the searching skills will improve the questions, paths or solutions will become authentic, who knows that someday you become so much proficient that you could find useful bits and pieces from the source code. That's is what I call the level of spiritual liberation.:) , even now I report duplicates, so no need to worry. I must agree that these dupes does frustrate the developer. (what Wedson Almeida Filho once called non-technical nonsense).  
Now, after this first level of salvation, the second think to accept is that the response of people can be extremely different and that is something you can't help, you simply move on, for example, once a answer of mine got deleted by the moderators on StackOverflow just because it contained a **single link**, but a comment from a person with high reputation(these are basically points in Stack overflow) which went like:-
	  > Your answer contains **links**( it was just a single one), it should be complete in itself without external links.  
I know, I have also read the guidelines of the site but that was the download link of the software the person would need to download to solve the issue. So, I just couldn't do anything. So there are incidents like this too. Rest, I believe that if you wouldn't give up trying, someday you will get appreciation for reporting the issues. I still remember that my first issue acceptance came when I reported a severe UI break in non maximised windows and it was the first report addressing the issue(I have previously checked any related open issues on the topic), there happened a small discussion and then a PR was requested addressing the issue I reported. To help a browser , that too one which is so popular felt like an achievement in itself.  
  
I would not talk about how you can contribute code in PRs and all that stuff in here as the blog has already become quiet long, thanks for reading till the end, some other day I will come back with some other story, till then shubh bhavatu!

